1:1	The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel;
1:2	To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding;
1:3	To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and equity;
1:4	To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.
1:5	A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall attain unto(to) wise counsels:
1:6	To understand a proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.
1:7	The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise wisdom and instruction.
1:8	My son, hear the instruction of thy(your) father, and forsake not the law of thy(your) mother:
1:9	For they shall be an ornament of grace unto(to) thy(your) head, and chains about thy(your) neck.
1:10	My son, if sinners entice thee(you), consent thou(you) not.
1:11	If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause:
1:12	Let us swallow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit:
1:13	We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil:
1:14	Cast in thy(your) lot among us; let us all have one purse:
1:15	My son, walk not thou(you) in the way with them; refrain thy(your) foot from their path:
1:16	For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.
1:17	Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.
1:18	And they lay wait for their own blood; they lurk privily for their own lives.
1:19	So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; which taketh away the life of the owners thereof.
1:20	Wisdom crieth(cries) without; she uttereth(utters) her voice in the streets:
1:21	She crieth(cries) in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth(utters) her words, saying,
1:22	How long, ye(you) simple ones, will ye(you) love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?
1:23	Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto(to) you, I will make known my words unto(to) you.
1:24	Because I have called, and ye(you) refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded;
1:25	But ye(you) have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof:
1:26	I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh;
1:27	When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you.
1:28	Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me:
1:29	For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD:
1:30	They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof.
1:31	Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
1:32	For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.
1:33	But whoso hearkeneth(heeds) unto(to) me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.
2:1	My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee;
2:2	So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding;
2:3	Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding;
2:4	If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures;
2:5	Then shalt thou understand the fear of the LORD, and find the knowledge of God.
2:6	For the LORD giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding.
2:7	He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly.
2:8	He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his saints.
2:9	Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea, every good path.
2:10	When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul;
2:11	Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee:
2:12	To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaketh froward things;
2:13	Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;
2:14	Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked;
2:15	Whose ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths:
2:16	To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with her words;
2:17	Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God.
2:18	For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.
2:19	None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life.
2:20	That thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous.
2:21	For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it.
2:22	But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.
3:1	My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments:
3:2	For length of days, and long life, and peace, shall they add to thee.
3:3	Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thine heart:
3:4	So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.
3:5	Trust in the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding.
3:6	In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.
3:7	Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the LORD, and depart from evil.
3:8	It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.
3:9	Honour the LORD with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase:
3:10	So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine.
3:11	My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD; neither be weary of his correction:
3:12	For whom the LORD loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.
3:13	Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding.
3:14	For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.
3:15	She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her.
3:16	Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour.
3:17	Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
3:18	She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is every one that retaineth her.
3:19	The LORD by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens.
3:20	By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.
3:21	My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion:
3:22	So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck.
3:23	Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble.
3:24	When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.
3:25	Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh.
3:26	For the LORD shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being taken.
3:27	Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it.
3:28	Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee.
3:29	Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.
3:30	Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.
4:1	Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding.
4:2	For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.
4:3	For I was my father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother.
4:4	He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep my commandments, and live.
4:5	Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.
4:6	Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep thee.
4:7	Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding.
4:8	Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her.
4:9	She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.
4:10	Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life shall be many.
4:11	I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right paths.
4:12	When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.
4:13	Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: keep her; for she is thy life.
4:14	Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men.
4:15	Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.
4:16	For they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.
4:17	For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.
4:18	But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.
4:19	The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they stumble.
4:20	My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.
4:21	Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thine heart.
4:22	For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh.
4:23	Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.
4:24	Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.
4:25	Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee.
4:26	Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.
4:27	Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.
